1986. This is Ed Hamlin here in El Paso, Texas,
beginning an interview with Robert Parsons. He
spent some years with the city planning agency in
El Paso prior to John Cunningham becoming the
director. Bob, how are you? Just fine. I actually
went to work for the city of El Paso August 22, 1949,
which is kind of prehistoric before Ed Hammond was
born. That's true, that's true. But at the time
that I went to work for the city, there had actually
been one full-time person in the Department of
Planning, a gentleman by the name of Walter E.
Stockwell, who was involved in the preparation of
the original Kessler city plan in certain
capacities. His name appears in the report. How
long had he been planning director? From about the
time that the Kessler plan was adopted, which was
quite a few years ago, he became the first planning
director for the city. Actually, city planning
engineer was his title. Shortly before I went to
work for the city, two gentlemen were hired by a
progressive mayor who thought that the city
needed more than just one person to head its
planning department. And the first two were V.L.
Mike Mahoney, who came from Tucson and who was
associated with Tucson planning department and
later on was at Austin, and then from there on I kind
of lost track of him. He was a very accomplished,
studious-type fellow who accomplished in the
area of planning. Along with him was William S.
Bonner, who was with the Department of Planning in
El Paso up until he went to University of Arkansas
in Fayetteville.
So together, those two people and the director
constituted the department. That was the
department. Along about the first part of 1950,
independently and individually those two moved
on to greener pastures and that was when i
transferred into the department of planning
working with mr stockwell from where i had been
hired which was the department of public
inspection of course i had an architectural
background that sort of thing so it was kind of a
natural gravitation and i worked with mr
stockwell and performed all the functions of
preparing material and undertaking studies for
the City Planning Commission and the Board of
Adjustment, City Council, such things as that,
for several years before I went into the Air Force
in 1952.
I was involved in such lovely things as
condemnation studies,
off-street parking, surveys, you know, the usual
things you would expect to get into. But with a
small apartment, really two people, three
people, we hired another person, you got to do
everything, obviously, a little bit of
everything. Had to do a lot of original-type
stuff. comprehensive plan, or the plan that was
originally adopted by the city, the Kessler plan,
had that been updated during this period? No.
Really, that was why Mike Mahoney and Bill Bonner
were hired, to update the plan, which essentially
had just been sitting there dormant for those many
years. They got into some of the earlier work on it,
did part of the work, and then of course they moved
on before it was really really updated. Portions
of it were facelifted, about the best way you could
say it. But the city did have zoning authority at
that time. Yes. In fact, zoning was practically
the most of the plan that the city was following.
That was essentially it. Describe El Paso during
this period. The post-war period was a period when
we saw a lot of growth. from the adoption of the
Kessler Plan up until that time, we hadn't seen the
kind of growth we've seen since then. Describe how
the city was composed and comprised, whether it
had, in fact, outgrown the Kessler Plan or not.
Actually, the population of the city did not
increase during the Kessler Plan, after the
Kessler Plan was adopted, but in fact declined.
And this was partly because of the Depression and
the economic conditions, and it was partly
because of other circumstances. It wasn't
actually until after the war, or during the war,
that the population came on back and drills began.
Of course, there was little subdivision activity
and not an awful lot of development because of the
war, during the war years. But along about 49,
well, from the late 40s on, That's when the
activity really began in the city, and it moved
from a population of about 100,000 to a population
of about 130,000 in the post-war years. It had an
area of about 25 square miles at that time, and much
of the area within the city limit was undeveloped.
And if you
relate it to The city as it is now, along about
Reynolds Avenue, was the end of the eastern growth
of the city, which, of course, extends beyond that
now probably, what, six or seven miles, seven or
eight miles. The Kessler plan as such didn't
provide, it didn't really constitute a
comprehensive plan as we'd consider it today. And
it specifically didn't provide a great deal of
guidance in terms of land use and future arterials
in the outlying areas. Would you agree with that or
not? It certainly was rather stylized at the time,
but it did provide broad brushstrokes, things
such as a park planning, a river walk, the
McKelligan Canyon Park, a tunnel through the
mountain, major thoroughfares planned. A lot of
the elements of the city plan were incorporated in
it, the unfortunate part was that very little of
the plan was implemented during the period from
when it was prepared and presented to the city up
until it really became obsolescent. I'm
overstating this, but that's essentially it. The
plan was followed to a fair degree, but not uh
didn't always have the kind of support it should
have had and certainly wasn't updated period on it
a major function of the planning department since
i've been aware of it has been the cartography
section the preparation of base maps and
preparation official city zoning maps and such
what uh what kind of map documents existed at the
time when you were with departments and how what
role did the department have in the preparation of
those maps Practically none. The city
engineering department prepared maps and had the
only cartography section that there really was.
The Department of Planning was principally, the
personnel were engaged in planning more or less
activities
rather than the preparation of maps and this sort
of thing. did the planned commission provide more
direction than perhaps it does today and on
planning matters planned commission at that time
consisted of five people who were rather than
another large commission that we have now and it
wasn't an attempt to represent a cross-section of
every facet of the community it was selected of the
prominent responsible intelligent people who
knew how to work together and wanted to work
together on building a better community. These
people were not representing particular
segments of the community, but they looked at
themselves as representing the community as a
whole. and thought of the community as a whole in
their activities that sounds like a bit of a
contrast with some of the commissions we've had at
least within my memory we have had a lot of growth in
the city and during a period when we had at-large
membership of the at-large elections of city
council members frequently we found a lot of
members of the city plan commission were I mean, I
think it's a good question. I think it's a good
question. I think it's a good question. I think
it's a good question. I think it's a good question.
I think it's a good question. I think it's a good
question. I think it's a good question. I think
it's a good question. I think it's a good question.
I think it's a good question. I think it's a good
question. uh knowledgeable in real estate but
they were not earning their living from real
estate or development the board of adjustment had
realtors on it and people in the development area
to give relief from the provisions of zoning
ordinance but the planning commission took a
little bit broader view with a little bit that the
leaders on the commission were looking at above
and beyond the dollar sign, shall we say. Today,
the zoning board of adjustment, the staff
assistance for the zoning board of adjustment is
provided by the public inspection department.
What was the relationship between city planning
and the zoning board of adjustment when you were
with the department? The department of planning
provided the technical assistance to the board of
adjustment. The public inspection department
was not involved in it. This was thought that,
well, if there was some question of construction
that entered into it or something with the
building code, they were invited in as guests. But
basically, the thinking at that time was that if
there were flaws in the zoning ordinance that
needed to be addressed, the staff would be able to
receive frequent requests for relief from
evasions of the ordinance and could address the
questions of the flaws more easily by dealing
directly with it. In other words, the commission
did its thing, and then the Board of Adjustment did
its thing, and the department provided the tie
between. How about in code enforcement of zoning
provisions? Essentially, the building
department enforced the zoning ordinance. Was
there a good relationship between the planning
department and the zoning and the billing
official for that purpose? Generally, yes. Of
course, the department provided technical
assistance to the building official. There was a
feeling, probably not openly stated, that their
job really was enforcement of the building code
rather than the zoning ordinance. And it was
looked upon perhaps as a little bit on the orphan
side, but there was good cooperation between the
two sections. During the period when you were with
the department, were any of the ordinances
changed, the zoning ordinance and the
subdivision ordinance in particular? At that
time, there was not a subdivision ordinance as
such. It was subdivision regulations. But as far
as the zoning ordinance was concerned, oh, yes.
During that period of time, the first provisions
for off-street parking and architectural
control in certain zones and all the little
refinements from the original zoning ordinance
were constantly being incorporated and updated
to meet the contemporary standards. I'm
interested in that from the standpoint the early
plan documents, the Kessler plan and such,
provided no specific guidelines with regard to
provisions which are commonly incorporated in
zoning ordinances, and yet it necessarily
involves planning work, not necessarily
comprehensive planning. The determination of
what is an appropriate setback and what is the
appropriate density within a given zoning
district, perhaps you could describe some of the
thinking at the time. that might have generated
changes in the zoning ordinance well the regional
zoning ordinance was prepared generally in
accordance with the direction that was indicated
in the city plan and it remained substantially
intact during the 30s and then the first
substantial updates were in the late late 30s and
And
would these changes then be described as perhaps
acknowledging more contemporary styles of
development? For instance, in the post-war era,
the tract housing became increasingly common,
and were you aware of changes that were made
specifically to accommodate that kind of
development? The only thing that comes to mind
were requirements for off-street parking. And
there were some changes made to the ordinance in
the form of new districts in residential areas and
apartment areas, which were more restrictive to
reflect garden apartment type development. to
provide for wider side yards in a higher-grade
residential than the old A Zone, so-called, which
called for a fifty-foot lot and five-foot side
yards. There was a double A Zone that was created,
which is larger lots and wider side yards and so on.
For the protection of the residences that were
more significant in size. Right. In your area,
that was the the first change that occurred in
tract development. And, of course, the garden
apartment type concept came in, and this also
required more flexible use of land in the
preparation of one- and two-story apartments,
low density. You mentioned parking standards
were incorporated. What existed prior to the
thinking during that era in the way of parking
standards? The standard in El Paso was a 50-foot
lot, as I mentioned, with a street in front and an
alley in back and usually a detached garage
opening in off of the alley. With the post-war
subdivision, the first thing that was limited, of
course, in El Paso was the alley. Streets were
reduced in width. Lots were increased in width and
reduced slightly in depth. And consequently, the
only access was from the front. And the first
problems that we perceived in a growing
community, growing family size and this sort of
thing, was the single garage or the parking space
that was provided on the site was often the first to
go in order to accomplish a slightly increased
residents take care of new children, this sort of
thing. Filling in the garage. Right. And so we
perceived that we were going to have to preserve
off-street parking in some fashion on the site, or
else enter into a period of chaos in your
developing areas, which we did. How about in
commercial districts, the parking standards?
What existed prior to that? Essentially nothing.
And this was left to the good development ideas of
those making or constructing buildings in
commercial areas.
This was probably commercial development was
addressed later than residential, including
apartment development. off-street parking was
easier to apply there on individual sites in
connection with apartment development
commercial came a little bit later and
how was the implementation of parkinson as
received by the development community so far as a
residential apartment there's no problem at all
so far as commercial was concerned there was a good
deal of consternation But it was quickly turned
into acceptance when those developers realized
that there was going to be, that the car was the most
important thing they had to accommodate.
Post-war period saw a tremendous amount of infill
development in El Paso's lower valley. And today,
it's not necessarily the most attractive area of
the city, as we have a major arterial that runs the
length of the valley that is lined with commercial
businesses and such. What was the thinking in
terms of the planning for that area at the time? Did
the growth in that area outstrip the planned
documents that were in effect? The old arterial to
which you refer is known as Alameda now. And it was
originally, or before that, it was US Highway 80.
And before that, it was State Highway 1. So
consequently, the creation of that facility
predated any real planning in the area. It was
totally in the rural area. An interesting facet of
that,
Texas adopted
a statute providing for subdivision regulation
within five miles of the city limits which at one
point in time was declared unconstitutional
which rather clandestinely as far as el paso was
concerned came came back on the books and for some
period of time the there was no planting beyond the
city limits. In other words, where the city limits
stopped was where planting stopped for the
community. Consequently, the lower valley area
you're talking about, if you're referring to, was
largely developed without a plant. The Oceanda
Heights and the Ranchland Hills area, the
lakeside and Miller's Lakeside, all these
outlying subdivisions just sort of came into
being without a plan, and consequently you have
offset streets, you have discontinuous streets,
and you have rather poor circulation. It is an area
of the city that has a very inadequate
thoroughfare plan today where it seems as though
all the major arterials are running parallel to
each other, and it makes it a problem to get around
in. And many of the arterials that enabled you to
get around at all were created after the fact,
expensively, at a later date, after planning came
into the area.
Well, that seems to be an area that grew without
much control. There was an area to the north that's
known generally as Cielo Vista, which has an
interesting history in terms of some of its
planning history. Were you involved in any of that
or aware of it? Yes, the Department of Planning was
involved in some of the earlier in-house master
planning of the aerial. This was originally
called the Winfrey's Nose Tract. It's just a big
piece of land south of the airport that was owned by
the federal government and acquired in
connection with the airport facility. was turned
over to the airport for disposition, the proceeds
of which were to go 100% into the improvement of the
airport area. The Department of Planning got into
the act regarding the early disposition of a part
of it. There was a reluctance to hire consultants
to do the work. So consequently, the department
was kind of pressed into into service to provide
some orderly disposal and development of it.
The area between Montana and Edgemere, to a large
degree, was planned by consulting engineers
working for the private developers who purchased
the earlier sections of the land. Later on, we were
successful in the later stages of it, getting the
airport to hire a consultant to master plan most of
the remaining area. In fact, all the remaining
area, both as to orderly disposition on a timely
basis, and master planning streets and parks and
schools and other facilities that would normally
be in a large subdivision area. So the city took on a
role beyond simply the preparation of a general
plan document, but preparing a rather specific
master plan in that area. In the earlier stages,
this is correct. Was it pretty faithfully
implemented? Oh, yes. Yes. It was both the city's
part in the coordination of the earlier
subdivisions and then in the after the master plan
was actually
closely on down to the to the southernmost portion
of it which was impacted to a degree by the freeway
interstate 10 which was developed after the whole
master plan was actually adopted. Today, when we
think about the southeast part of the city, we
refer generally to the area between Montana
Avenue and Interstate 10, and Interstate 10 is the
driving force for much of that development. The
period when you worked for the department,
Interstate 10 didn't exist, and its alignment
hadn't been determined, and perhaps even the
concept of what a freeway is was not fully
understood. Can you describe that for me? Yes, the
Department of Transportation, well, Texas
Highway Department at the time, knew that there
ultimately would be a freeway coming through the
El Paso area, but they weren't sure what a freeway
was or what size it was. They had no criteria for a
freeway. So the Department of Planning, working
with the Highway Department, designated what's
now known as Edgemere Drives as the future
location of the freeway. It paralleled Montana
Street. It was 200 feet wide. It incorporated as
much as at that time, which was before any freeways
were actually constructed. As a matter of fact,
the formal document that we had to go on was a study
that was prepared back in 1940. which referred to
interregional highways prepared by the federal
government. That was kind of the Bible, but it
didn't really tell much about what a freeway was
going to look like. So consequently, we
designated this 200-foot strip as a reserved area
so that we wouldn't get the area cut off totally and
require a lot of demolition of structures in order
to get this freeway through. Later on, it was
determined this was totally inadequate. It was
not properly located. And the Highway
Department's actual location for Interstate 10
was from a half a mile to several miles south and not
parallel to Montana, but more or less dividing
equally the area between the river and Montana.
You mentioned a while ago that a lot of the highway
facilities seem to parallel one another. This is
true, but then the way El Paso is, the
configuration, the squeeze between Mexico and
the south the mountain that pokes down in the
middle of it, and the military reservation that
takes a big hunk out of the northeast section. So
really and truly, we have a thoroughfare system
that kind of wanders around between these fixed
facilities. And that's the direction that
traffic has to move, and that's the way the
facilities are built. And they do end up, many
facilities, more or less parallel.
The period between 1950 and 1960 saw the city
better than double in population from about
130,000 to over 270,000. There was a lot of growth
and change. From your perception, describe what
the community, describe that period of growth and
what it meant to the community and where it came
from. OK. I was absent from the community from 52 to
56 when I was in the, Air Force during the Korean
festivities. When I left in 1952, June the 9th, the
Department of Planning consisted of three
people. The community was growing. When I came
back in 1956, the Department of Planning had grown
to about seven or eight people. The former
director, Mr. Stockwell, had retired. We had a new
planning director, Loudon Lingo, And we had
really begun more fully the planning process.
There was some money being committed to capital
improvements on a fairly regular basis each year
with the budget. Consequently, the planning was
beginning to come into its own.
The large growth you referred to came about
primarily because of what so many people had
discovered in the Southwest as to climate, as to
interest in the area and the charm of the area. And
there was an awful lot of returning GIs, people who
had been stationed here, who had been assigned
here for a period of time, and the military as
civilians coming back into the community made the
biggest impact and the biggest part of that
growth. along with industrial development in the
area.
In the pre-war period, Juarez was a sleepy
community, and El Paso was the dominant
community, at least twice the size of Juarez. As El
Paso grew, it continued to outpace the growth of
Juarez for a period of time.
It's interesting because Oahuas today is
probably two and a half times the size of El Paso.
Easily. And, of course, this is largely due to the
economic situation and the migration to the north
and across the border. The, I would say, migration
to the north and the whole trend of urbanization,
the rural population migrating to the cities, I
suppose, is contributing to the growth of Oahuas.
Well, most of the growth of wars, obviously, is due
to the fact that it offers some hope of migration to
the United States, and twin-plan concepts, and so
on, so on, so on. Well-known. During that period,
you mentioned a lot of the Wingo.